# Chapter Summary: The Development and Classification of Languages

    The chapter describes that in 19th Century philologist **Jacob Grimm** established a sound change know as the **Grimm’s Law**. This helped distinguish Germanic branch of language from other Indo-European Languages. It denotes for example the shift from Indo-European **/p/** to Germanic **/f/**, this is one of the features that can show distinction between language families and show that English is a Germanic language. 
	However the author of the book points out that comparing cognate vocabulary is not the only way to prove that languages should be classified into families of similar ones. Big part of comparing languages is also their **grammar** and the similarities in grammar structure of various languages. The chapter notes that most Indo-European languages contain **inflection** which marks **case**, **number** and **gender** on nouns, adjectives and sometimes articles. The author of the chapter goes on to explain how these markers were present in PIE language. Further in the chapter the author presents a table with comparison of Latin and English showcasing that some PIE languages have a more complex morphology than others. The author explains the morphology of Latin as compared to English it is a highly inflectional language, showing how the Latin equivalent of the English word „girl” is inflected using cases (Nominative, Genitive, Dative, Accusative, Ablative, Vocative) and number (singular or plural). Latin here is contrasted with English and German, proving that adjectives in Latin are also inflected. The author explains that English has a rather simplified system for marking case, number and gender mostly highlighting them with the use of determinatives such as this/these. 
    Another way to compare languages marked by the author is looking at **historical/archeological information**. It is definitely less linguistic than the previous two ways, but can be a useful comparison tool as well.  This way of looking at languages however has its limitations, since the further in the past we look the less reliable the linguistic and historical information become. As the most widely accepted theory of how the PIE language came to be, the author denotes the **Kurgan Hypothesis**. This theory states that PIE language originated north of the Black Sea and spread through migrations by horse-riding warriors. The author also points out how the comparative  method has helped reconstruct language families like Indo-European. The chapter mentions some theories that go beyond PIE proposing larger language families such as Eurasiatic, Nostratic and Proto-World, however these theories are highly controversial. 
	The next section of the Chapter titled **„The Development of English”** shows the history of English language. Starting from talking about its beginnings around AD 400, after the Romans left England. In the sub-section about Old English the author highlights that at this stage the language was highly inflectional with case, number, and gender markings showing this at an example of the Old English version of “The Lord’s Prayer.” The next sub-section talks about Middle English illustrating the changes which occurred in the language and showing Middle English vocabulary and grammar with the example of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales. 

    The next section explores the codification and standardization of English during the **Modern English period**, highlighting the publication of major grammar and dictionaries like Samuel Johnson’s 1755 dictionary or Noah Webster’s 1806 dictionary. Attempts to create an “English Academy” similar to the French Academy were unsuccessful, but these efforts signified a growing concern for documenting and prescribing the language.
    There is also a mention of the transition from Middle to Modern English, explaining how vowels were raised in the vowel chart or became diphthongs, and visualizing the process of analyzing vowels to put them in the **vowel chart**. The chapter then examines the impact of colonization, focusing on how the colonization of America and the rise of the United States as a superpower spread English globally, leading to the emergence of many new varieties of English.
    Next, the text discusses **typological language classification**, which groups languages by shared linguistic structures, such as word order, rather than by historical relationships. English is categorized as an SVO language. 
    The author distinguishes between **internal** and **external** influences on language change. According to the author, natural processes, such as simplifications, have led English to evolve from a highly inflected language to a more isolating one. And externally, contact with other languages, especially French, after the Norman Conquest, introduced significant vocabulary and structural changes.
    Furthermore, there is a discussion of **language change as a dynamic process**, noting how internal pressures such as regularization and external pressures like social or cultural contact work together to drive changes in English. Examples include the Great Vowel Shift and shifts in word order due to declining case marking.